---
layout: default
title: "Vasili"
date: 2012-10-31
category: writing
---

"Let Tzfat do what Tzfat does."

Elhanon, my teacher, repeated these words frequently during my school trip to Israel. He described Tzfat as a magical city where extraordinary, mystic occurrences were common. Elhanon's words stuck in my mind as I entered a three week volunteer period at a kindergarten in Tzfat.

The Old City, fresh mountain air and a special feeling of calmness. Tzfat's special vibe kicked in as I walked from my dorm to the kindergarten.

I entered the kindergarten, met with the teachers, and introduced myself to the class. I received a cold glare from the children. I wondered why they seemed so scared. Maybe because I spoke Hebrew with a goofy accent.

The class split up and began to go about their usual activities. I sat down at a table with some girls and tried to draw with them. They moved to the other side of the table and refused to speak. I hoped for better luck with some of the boys.

I made my way outside and attempted to play catch with some of the boys. They ran away, so I returned inside. I began a search to find a kindergartner who would play with me.

A small, blond-haired boy approached me with play-doh. His name was Vasili.

"Ball", he said. He handed me the play-doh and I made it into a ball as he requested. Vasili and I grew closer as the day progressed. I spent most of the day in the sandbox with Vasili, and only briefly played with the other children.

My first day at the kindergarten came to a close. I told the children I would return tomorrow and walked towards the door. Vasili stopped me. He was three years old, and only knew about 30 Hebrew words. I simply said "tomorrow", but he understood. Vasili tightly grasped the gate and watched closely through the fence as I walked up the steps back to my dorm. I reached the top of the steps and turned back towards the school. We made eye contact and I smiled.

After a few days, my days at the kindergarten had become routine. I would play with Vasili for an hour or so, play with some of the other kids, and then return to Vasili for the rest of the time.

Vasili was unlike the other kindergartners. He craved attention. He dragged me to the sandbox. He forced me to sit with him at meals. He refused to share toys. He needed to get his way. He wanted me by his side.

One day, I was on my way out but Vasili quietly grabbed me and pulled me down to his level. He opened his arms and I picked him up. He gave me a kiss on the cheek and I put him down. Once again, Vasili grasped the fence and alertly followed each and everyone one of my steps until I was completely out of sight. He knew I would be back.

Two weeks had passed, and the connection between Vasili and I grew stronger. We played hide-and-go-seek. While I used the bathroom, he would search endlessly for me. Each day would end with a kiss on the cheek.

My last day at the kindergarten arrived. I told Vasili that this would be my final day with him. We sat in the sand box with his toy car and a ball.

"I like my dad", said Vasili.
"I am your dad?", I asked.
"Yes", muttered Vasili, with a smile.

A three-year-old boy with whom I communicated with using at most 30 words called me his father.

Normally, I would have taken this as a joke. But not with Vasili. I could sense his desire and urge for attention. I needed to know more. I made my way over to the teacher and told her what happened. She explained that Vasili was originally born in Russia and that his mother was 14 at the time of his birth. Vasili's mother moved to Israel with her mother in order to escape the teasing she received for having a baby as a high schooler. Both Vasili and his mother were forced away from the father. Thus, Vasili's mother goes to school during the day, and works at night. Vasili is without a father and rarely sees his mother.

I tried to imagine the immeasurable impact I had made on Vasili. I found it impossible. I wondered how I could ever leave him. How could I walk up those steps one more time, knowing he would be watching each of my steps without the comfort of knowing he would see me again?

I spent my last three hours at the kindergarten with Vasili. He sat on a bicycle and asked me to push him. I pushed him for a few minutes, and realized it was not enough. I lifted him up and carried him around on the bike as if he was flying. Vasili idolized me. Worshiped me. Called me his father. He deserved to feel on top of the world. The oversized smile as he flew through the playground indicated so.

The moment neither Vasili or I ever wanted to happen finally came. It was time for me to go. Vasili knew. I kneeled down and told him that I had to leave. I promised I would return to Israel one day. He knew this was my final goodbye.

"Dad! Dad! Dad! No! No! No!", screamed Vasili. He refused to let go of my shirt. One of the teachers grabbed him so I could exit.

I waved goodbye once more from outside the fence. I made my way towards the steps, but knew this ascent was different. I would not return tomorrow. I had seen Vasili for the last time. I reached the final step and turned back towards the school. Vasili, as always, watched me. His teary eyes stared at me as I stood at the top of the steps. We both waved one final time.

As I made my way back to my dorm, and breathed the cool mountain air on my way through the Old City, Elhanon's words repeated in my head.

"Let Tzfat do what Tzfat does".